In the early 1930s, Frank Lloyd Wright
had a realization. A realization most
architects come to at some point in
their careers. City planning is better
than architecture.
>> I think I'd really like to be a city
planner, you know? Why limit myself to
one building when I can design a whole
city?
>> It's understandable that he turned to
city planning. He was designing this
clunker of a building at the same time.
It was clearly the moment to move on
from architecture as he was way past his
peak. Now, obviously, I'm kidding,
mostly. I'm allowed to make that joke
because I have a master's in
architecture. Anyway, Wright is
undeniably one of America's best
architects, but how is he designing
cities? His concept, Broadacre City, is
bold but weird. On one hand, he
anticipated the end game of
suburbanization, something called the
exurbs. But in its time, it was not
terribly influential and almost
forgotten. I've been in the world of
city planning for 25 years, and even I
only know the broad strokes of a city
plan. But the images are just so
compelling and strange. Helicopters and
super low-density homes, that I'm making
this video because I want to satisfy my
curiosity and find out more. So, come
along with me as we figure out if this
architect developed something 100 years
ago that we can still learn from today.
Let's head to Broadacre City after the
bike bell.
>> [bell]
>> Here's the Broadacre City map. We'll
talk about all the theory and context
later, but let's just walk through the
map first. Here it is. It's 4 square
miles. That means that Broadacre City is
neatly fit within the mile grids of the
United States. I have a whole video on
that if you're interested. He doesn't
put streets in at the mile intervals,
though. Instead, all of the 4 square
mile Broadacres are connected by what he
calls a major arterial. It's basically a
modern highway. Wright believed that all
highways should be at least six lanes,
and all other streets should be at least
three lanes. I guess he was a Luddite
proponent before they were cool.
The houses are the main idea of
Broadacre City. There are four types of
housing: apartment buildings, minimum
houses, medium houses, and larger houses
up here in the hills. This is no
socialist utopia. There is still
inequality and it translates into the
housing. All houses though would come
with at least one acre of land. The idea
is that everyone would be able to have
their own market gardens and fruit
trees. The population of these four
square miles would be about 4,200 people
in 1,400 homes. So, when you see the
houses on the map, realize that these
aren't to scale. There would be lots of
homes. Also, right then and there not
everyone would want to take care of an
acre of land. They might be unwilling to
give up apartment living. That's why he
has these apartment buildings located
here breaking up the uniformly
horizontal structure of Broadacre City.
Not all food would come from these large
lot homes. He included space for little
farms, vineyards, and orchards. His city
wasn't completely agrarian. People can
still work in small industries. Now,
what about shopping? Well, that's what
the markets are for. These are really
interesting and I'll talk about them in
more detail later in the video. Finally,
the rest of the Broadacre is dedicated
to nature, recreation, and public uses.
Things like a school, church, arboretum,
zoo, university, arena, art center,
county seat of government, airport,
clinics, games, and races. Now that
you're oriented, we can talk more about
the backstory of this plan. Frank Lloyd
Wright revealed Broadacre City to the
world via a massive model at the
Industrial Arts Exhibition at
Rockefeller Center in 1935.
The 1930s are a fascinating time in
American urban history as well as a
fascinating time in Wright's own life.
On one hand, he was designing
Fallingwater and would be asked to
design the Guggenheim in 1943. He was in
his late 50s and still designing
masterpieces. On the other hand, he had
already designed most of his famous
homes and the new trends in architecture
were making him look old-fashioned. His
work defined the 1890s through the
1920s, but the international style of
modern architecture was coming into
vogue. Bauhaus architects like Walter
Gropius and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, as
well as Le Corbusier, were pushing a new
vision for architecture. Clean lines and
gleaming towers. Wright, known for his
impressive and ornate ornamentation,
found the international style to be boxy
and bland. But, it was the trend, and
Wright was out of the trend. Broadacre
City can be seen as Wright's obstinate
response to those tall, gleaming
skyscrapers. His plan is aggressively
horizontal. Horizontality has always
been a big part of his style. He
embraced the prairie landscapes of the
Midwest. But, the architectural elite
were beginning a program of
systematically tearing down the old city
and building modern ones. Wright's
Industrial Arts Exhibition was sparsely
attended and did not make an impact.
But, just because it didn't make an
impact didn't mean that he was wrong
about the direction cities would take.
And in some ways, he was more right than
his modernist rivals. These modernists
were all about remaking the city, and
they really convinced decision-makers
and the general public of their vision.
It wasn't until the 1950s and 1960s when
people like Jane Jacobs stood up and
said, "Enough is enough." People started
to realize that central cities do not
need to be replaced with soulless office
towers.
Wright's ideas were also bad for cities,
at least by today's standards, but he
did understand that the future of cities
were actually in the suburbs. Modern
architects believe that technologies
like steel, plate glass, elevators, and
air conditioning would reshape cities,
allowing everyone to live up in the
fresh air with beautiful views from
their condo towers. Wright believed in
something different. He believed that
the technologies of cars, telephones,
and radios would mean that nobody really
need to live near each other. Remote
work would be possible, and if given the
choice, people would choose a house in
nature over an apartment in a tower.
Wright was actually having the correct
conversation about the future of cities,
even if he believed in a philosophy of
absolute minimum density. If Wright was
having the correct conversation, what
was he saying exactly? His 1935
exhibition didn't get into a lot of
detail, but he laid it all out in his
book, The Disappearing City, written in
1932.
I was surprised to find that it was not
easy to get my hands on the book. When I
finally did, I realized why. It's not
very well written.
It turns out that being a gifted
architect does not make you a gifted
writer.
But the book lays out his overall
philosophy of cities. It goes something
like this. Modern cities of the 1930s
are emasculating places that are wholly
unnatural. Our primitive ancestors
understood that we needed to be in
nature. Thomas Jefferson realized this,
too. Wright loves the idea of
Jeffersonian democracy, of everyone
being a gentleman farmer far from the
ills of the modern city. It's manly.
I should mention that Wright is pretty
darn sexist and doesn't really care
about women at all.
Anyway, his Broadacre City idea is all
about giving people land and having them
work that land instead of working in a
cubicle or an assembly line. When I was
researching this topic, I found the
paper The Suburb anity of Frank Lloyd
Wright in the Journal of Planning
History to be really interesting and
useful.
According to the author, Joseph Watson,
Wright had done much of his early work
in the suburbs. His Prairie Homes in Oak
Park, a suburb of Chicago. In those
days, around the turn of the last
century, zoning really wasn't a thing
yet. Suburbs had low-income homes,
high-income homes, industry, open
pastures, and everything else just
sprinkled throughout the landscape.
Wright apparently liked that
arrangement. I guess that makes him
anti-zoning.
But like I mentioned before, Wright was
very pro-car. This is in contrast with
many urbanists of the time.
Most of those guys really tried to
minimize the impact of the car. Radburn,
New Jersey is the classic example of
this. Built in 1929, it also had
cul-de-sacs, but the cul-de-sacs went
into the back of the houses.
And the front doors opened onto
pedestrian paths that connected to a
shared green space and a school. Wright
did the same thing, putting a school at
the center of the Broadacre. If a kid
lived in a minimum house or an
apartment, they could walk to school
without crossing a busy street. But he
never went into much detail about what
the path system would look like. And a
lot of the kids in the other houses
would be much farther from the school.
It's like he copied the other urbanist's
homework, but did it poorly.
His embrace of the car extended to
commercial areas. Let's look at these
markets located in close proximity to
the main arterial.
Back in the 1920s and 1930s, little
roadside filling stations popped up
everywhere to fuel up all of those new
cars. They were typically small and
nothing much to look at, but they
obviously grew up into the modern gas
stations we know today. Wright thought
that these filling stations could be
something even more.
To back up half a step, he envisioned an
end to railroads. He called them old and
cumbersome. He believed that airports
and trucks could be the way of the
future. He believed that filling
stations would serve as major
distribution centers in this new freight
network. Products would go from the
airplane to the truck to the store shelf
without even a warehouse in between.
That's not quite right, either, but he
did kind of predict big box stores.
These new filling stations would serve
multiple functions in Broadacre City
beyond just distribution stations. They
would have restaurants, chain stores,
bathrooms, motels, and whatever else the
community needed.
I know that one of the flash images of
Broadacre City features these helicopter
things.
Wright called them air rotors, a sort of
personal helicopter that would serve as
air taxis. I believe these could land on
people's 1-acre parcels, making them
sort of a drone delivery or air Uber
kind of thing. It's worth noting that
Wright did not add these air rotors to
his design until the 1950s, well after
the initial introduction. Helicopters
were pretty new technology in the 1920s
and 1930s, but less revolutionary in the
1950s. One thing to note here is that
Broadacre City is often referred to as a
utopian vision, but I'd argue that it's
not actually that at all. Most utopian
visions present a possible future if
things change quite a bit, but Wright
was more or less just projecting what he
thought the future would be like. It's a
prediction that he hoped to shape. He
was obviously biased by his own policies
and viewpoints on cities and
architecture, but he really was looking
at trends and just pushing them to what
he thought were logical conclusions.
His point for houses spread far across
the landscape was in part because he
believed in that agrarian Jeffersonian
ideal, but also because he saw the
changes technology was bringing.
Telephones and radios meant that you
could do a lot of work at home. Why
would you ever need to be in close
proximity like a city requires you to
be? And in the 1930s, suburbanization
was really starting to take hold. We
associate rampant suburbanization with
the post-war years, but it started
beforehand.
The car propelled people into the
suburbs, out of the old Industrial
Revolution cities. Wright just assumed
that suburbanites would want more and
more land. Why not a full acre per
household?
While Broadacre City never fully
materialized, planners keep coming back
to it because Wright did get a few
things right. Like I mentioned,
technology allowing for working from
home did kind of come true, though he
didn't anticipate the details of video
chat.
Planners really consider Broadacre City
to be a blueprint for the exurbs.
Exurbs are even lower density
developments than suburbs and found
further away from city centers, usually
in rural or natural environments. Homes
are on larger lots and households tend
to have higher income. They're on the
very fringes of the urban to rural
transition and are often criticized for
being terrible for the environment
because they use up prime forest habitat
or farmland to support relatively few
people. They also force people to drive
much longer distances.
This is obviously not great and most
planners will tell you that exurban
development is one of the worst ways a
metropolitan area can grow.
But this is also why most people look
back at Broadacre City and see a bad
idea. But it's not an incorrect idea. He
did kind of predict the future. It's
just that we live in and around bad
ideas, unfortunately.
While it's too bad we're not all flying
around the suburbs on personal
helicopters, maybe you'll be flying
around the world on vacation this
summer. If you do, you absolutely need
to get an eSIM so you have internet
access when you're there. And you'll
want the best service. Sal is an
incredible new eSIM service app from
Nord Security. Because if you've ever
been lost abroad or badly needed an
internet connection with no Wi-Fi in
sight, you'll understand what a
difference a local SIM card can make. I
just never travel without one. Because
eSIM provides an internet connection
where you travel and saves you a ton of
money on roaming fees. And you can buy
the data you want. Saily lets you choose
from multiple affordable eSIM plans in
over 150 countries.
When I was in Japan, an eSIM was a
lifesaver. I had it activated and
working even before I made it through
customs. I was traveling with my family,
so having the internet connection was a
huge piece of mind for us. I was
communicating with our taxi driver and
confirming reservations before leaving
the terminal. And we could just skip all
the lines at the local SIM shops. We
just want to get started having fun as
soon as possible. And while we were in
Tokyo, the eSIM let us navigate the
Tokyo subway without a hitch. We were
uploading fun family photos to social
media in real time without worrying
about roaming fees or throttled speeds.
I could even use my phone as a hotspot,
keeping the kids' tablets going during
breaks at the hotel. Plus, with the
Saily app, getting an eSIM could not be
simpler. You just buy it and activate
it, all on the Saily app or website. And
once you've got it activated, you're
good to use the internet wherever you go
without needing to pop into a cafe and
pray they have Wi-Fi.
And of course, no waiting for a physical
SIM card or having to switch one out.
And all Saily eSIM plans are compatible
with iOS and Android devices. An eSIM
can be installed only once, limiting the
need for users to install a new eSIM for
each country. So you're covered
virtually wherever you're going. So go
click on the link on screen or below and
use the code CITYBEAUTIFUL to get an
exclusive 15% off your first purchase. A
Saily eSIM really is a traveler's best
friend. It's the best decision you can
make before going to another country.